2020\'s main goal is to use Vale to start showing the world that single
ownership with constraint refs is a great approach to fast, safe, and
easy code.

[[LLVM Backend]{.underline}](#llvm-backend)

[[Binding Generator]{.underline}](#binding-generator)

[[Roguelike Demo]{.underline}](#roguelike-demo)

[[Syntax Highlighting]{.underline}](#syntax-highlighting)

[[Launch Vale.dev Website]{.underline}](#launch-vale.dev-website)

[[Stretch Goals]{.underline}](#stretch-goals)

> [[Better Parser]{.underline}](#better-parser)
>
> [[Better Errors]{.underline}](#better-errors)
>
> [[Online Playground]{.underline}](#online-playground)
>
> [[Articles]{.underline}](#articles)

# LLVM Backend

When Vale has this, it will be a true compiler! It previously had an
incomplete and primitive one that generated .ll text, which was awkward
and extremely slow.

Once we have this, we can:

-   Compile optimized code, to benchmark against other languages to show
    > that Vale is on par with Rust and C++ speed-wise.

-   Make Incendian Falls 2 to showcase what Vale can do.

-   Start self-hosting; make the Vale compiler written in Vale.

[[More
here!]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UocNPexTjZCMYLURqoBncc1JOcdO_c9RAnpRfVeIHDg/edit?usp=sharing)

# Binding Generator

Vale\'s killer feature will be interoperating with the outside world,
and that will need a binding generator which will make wrapper classes
in the other language for Vale objects, and wrapper classes in Vale for
the other language\'s objects. Cross-references will be represented by
integers, and the binding code will maintain the maps pointing at the
objects.

First one will be with C#, and written generally enough to be reused for
C++, ObjC, Swift, Java, Kotlin, JS, and Typescript.

# Roguelike Demo

Make Incendian Falls 2, using Vale for all the game logic. This helps
for three reasons:

-   It gives us some authority when we say \"yes, this
    > single-ownership-with-constraint-refs approach works\".

-   It proves that a large project can be made in Vale.

-   It\'ll make for great eye-candy for the vale.dev front page!

For this, we\'ll need the LLVM backend and the binding generator.

# Syntax Highlighting

Syntax highlighting is surprisingly helpful for explaining or
understanding a language, and we\'ll have a ton of snippets on the
vale.dev site which would be greatly helped by syntax highlighting.

For example, bolding variable declarations makes it easier to understand
that we\'re making new variables, which could give further hints about
what destructuring is:

> fn main() {
>
> **ship** = Spaceship(3, 2, \"Firefly\", \"Serenity\");
>
> (**engines**, **wings**) = ship.getEnginesAndWings();
>
> println(\"Num engines: \" + engines);
>
> }

.tmLanguage is a pretty standard syntax highlighting language, used by
most editors.

Good resource for making a .tmLanguage:

[[https://www.apeth.com/nonblog/stories/textmatebundle.html]{.underline}](https://www.apeth.com/nonblog/stories/textmatebundle.html)

We can even use .tmLanguage to syntax highlight for the site, if we
convert the output of
[[https://github.com/Microsoft/vscode-textmate]{.underline}](https://github.com/Microsoft/vscode-textmate)
into HTML.

(and for web:
[[https://github.com/NeekSandhu/monaco-textmate/blob/master/README.md]{.underline}](https://github.com/NeekSandhu/monaco-textmate/blob/master/README.md))

# Launch Vale.dev Website

This is the first tangible step towards Vale\'s larger goal of showing
the world that single ownership with constraint refs can be an amazing,
easy solution to the GC problem.

The basic site\'s infrastructure is ready, but only some of the content
is written.

# Stretch Goals

## Better Parser

The current parser fails with an unhelpful message if there was a syntax
error *anywhere*, because it\'s using scala\'s parser combinators (a
great starting point, but like any parser technology, falls on its face
w.r.t. errors).

We should make a manual recursive-descent parser, which can parse
function-by-function, and recover and continue on errors, and give
helpful hints when the user makes the obvious mistakes.

Also, if we have the LLVM backend, this could be written in Vale itself!

## Better Errors

Past the Parser, the Scout and Templar produce rather cryptic messages,
especially in the template engine, and then halts the entire program. We
should make the compiler more fault-tolerant.

## Online Playground

Once we have reasonable error handling, we can put the compiler in the
hands of users, at least as a playground on the site. We can use this to
show people how easy it is to do things with single ownership.

## Articles

Write a series of articles on vale.dev describing what it\'s like to use
single ownership, and how it\'s a great valid alternative to GC (and
maybe a few articles comparing it to C++, Rust, and Swift).
