Builds on [[HGM V14 and
V15]{.underline}](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mNc5INr_TnHjmsKZeay6mYY08iN3H_Rag9DrBBstMy0/edit).

# The Problem

There\'s some problems with keeping things alive, as we have.

## In Arrays

Let\'s say we have this myArr of Spaceship:

> myArr: \-- 0: shipX \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-- 1 \-\-\-\-\--
>
> / \\ \|
>
> engineX navigationX \...

and we\'re in this stack trace:

-   main ← has scope tether on shipX

-   someOtherFunc

-   replaceFirstElement

replaceFirstElement then wants to overwrite shipX with shipY. Now our
array looks like this:

> myArr: \-- 0: shipY \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-- 1 \-\-\-\-\--
>
> / \\ \|
>
> engineY navigationY \...

But where did engineX and navigationX go? They were leaked.

### A Solution: The Phantom Root

When we overwrite something inline like this, we should put its
hierarchy on the undead cycle. We *could* individually put engineX and
also navigationX onto the cycle, but instead, let\'s malloc a \"phantom
ship\", called shipXP, and make *it* point to engineX and navigationX,
and put it on the undead cycle.

> undead head -\> undead node \-\-\-\-\-\--\> \...
>
> \|
>
> shipXP
>
> / \\
>
> engineA navigationA

main will see something interesting: when they dereference what they
thought was shipX, they\'ll actually be reading shipY. A bit weird, but
still type-stable, so fine.

shipXP will expire when main no longer has a scope tether to myArr\[0\].

The entire hierarchy, shipXP + engineA + navigationA, is known as an
**undead hierarchy.**

### The Solution\'s Downside

It could have an edge case though: if we never let go of that scope
tether, we could be building up a ton of things in the undead cycle.

If we called replaceFirstElement again, and put shipZ in its place\...

> myArr: \-- 0: shipZ \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-- 1 \-\-\-\-\--
>
> / \\ \|
>
> engineZ navigationZ \...

Then shipY is on the undead cycle too.

## In Structs

It turns out, this issue also arises in structs!

Instead of an array, imagine myArr was a containing struct.

The same problem happens.

We can use the same solution, which is kind of nice.

However, we still have the solution\'s downside\... now for structs too.
This downside is now much more common.

## Thoughts on the Problem

-   Inlines in structs are the real challenge, because they don\'t have
    > their own generation or scope tether, which might have helped with
    > array elements.

-   What particularly sucks here: when we replace a Spaceship (shipX),
    > which has final references to something (engineA), we *are*
    > basically changing that final reference to point to something
    > else. So **final references aren\'t really final!**

-   If something\'s its own heap allocation, we can keep it alive, with
    > the undead cycle. This is only a problem with things inside
    > structs and arrays.

-   The real problem is that we build up a bunch of instances, and a lot
    > of them aren\'t even reachable by main. main only had access to
    > myArr\[0\], engineX, and navigationX. Nobody really needs engineY
    > or navigationY.

    -   Well, I guess we can\'t know if nobody needs those. Imagine we
        > call replaceFirstElement *recursively*, and they all take in
        > parameters of some of the old things, which were scope
        > tethered.

-   This problem happens when someone changes a final owning ref inside
    > something thats varying inline.

    -   In not really a type-changing or shape-changing problem, because
        > we\'re likely re-pointing the final owning thing to something
        > of the same type. It\'s more like a **territory change**,
        > where we change the indirectly owned areas of memory.

-   We can detect when this happens, kind of?

    -   With a scope tether, we could remember the first owned final
        > heap reference. If we see that that changes, we know that this
        > happened.

        -   In fact, we could copy the entire inline thing off to the
            > side while we\'re working with it.

    -   If we had a byte (or even less) as a version number for this
        > inline thing, we could compare that byte to a remembered value
        > perhaps?

    -   We can remember the **First Final Owned Pointer** (FFOP) in
        > something. If it changes, we know that there was a territory
        > change.

-   The solution should preferably be able to handle:

    -   **Hierarchy borrowing:** If we tether the above Spaceship, we
        > should be able to access the owned engine without tethering
        > engine.

    -   **Detect push/pop while iterating** an array.

    -   **Zero-cost array iteration:** If we have an array of Engine {
        > fuel int; size int; } then we should be able to iterate over
        > them and read them without needing any tethering.

        -   Bonus: **zero-cost element hierarchy borrowing**: also be
            > able to do zero-cost array iteration over Spaceship {
            > engine \^Engine; } and read the engine without needing a
            > tether.

            -   This isnt *super* necessary though, as we can likely
                > tether something during the engine dereference.

# Tools

Here\'s a lot of techniques found when exploring the conundrum. Could be
useful to keep around, for the next time we discover a flaw.

## Know If We\'re the Only Tether (KIWOT)

A tether is 1 byte, and we store H in it, H = stack height of our local,
and remember the old value. If old value == 0 and the object\'s tether
byte is still H, then we\'re the only tether.

-   oldValue must be passed in as part of the borrow ref. Or, it can be
    > checked ahead of time, and we just pass a bool (isFirstTether)
    > around.

-   We can skip the tether == H if there\'s no other tethers in this
    > function that might have tethered it since we got our tether.

An interesting situation can arise if we alias a borrow ref inside an
expression.

struct Ship { engine Engine; weapon Weapon; }

struct Engine { \... }

struct Weapon { \... }

fn fire(engine &Engine, weapon &Weapon) { \... }

fn main() {

\...

myShip &Ship = getShip(\...); // original tether

fire(myShip.engine, myShip.weapon);

}

At the time of the original tether, lets say there are no other tethers
on that ship, this is the first tether. So, the myShip reference is a
unique tether, in that its \"old tether value\" is zero.

But then we \"split\" this tether into two, when we call fire. Now we
have two constraint references which both think they\'re the only
tether. This breaks our assumption, and madness ensues.

There\'s an easy solution, luckily. In the engine and weapon borrow ref
parameters we\'re passing to fire, instead of including oldValue, just
pass in (arbitrarily) 0xFF. Then, nobody will use it to modify anything.
(or, just pass false for isFirstTether).

**this whole == H thing might not work, we can modify the object through
the first reference, if the second reference writes the same H to it.
the first reference remembers a 0.**

some solutions:

-   Do a 8b reference counter instead. Unlikely we\'ll have exactly 256
    > borrow refs to a particular object.

-   Do a compile-time generated 8b number, plus the current stack
    > pointer (so recursion doesnt break it).

-   Have a thread-local or parameter, add Q every function beginning, Q
    > = next prime after number of locals. Subtract local\'s H before
    > writing it in.

Could decrease the generation size and increase this thing\'s size if
we\'re worried about it being too small.

Could do RC in dev/test since it will catch pretty much everything, and
do random in production.

## Stack Scanning

We can know all the currently active tethers, by scanning the stack,
either with stack maps or a linked list between tethers.

## Detect That Inline Things Changed

If we have this:

> struct Spaceship {
>
> engine! Engine;
>
> }
>
> struct Engine {
>
> warpCoil \^WarpCoil;
>
> }
>
> fn moo() {
>
> ship &Spaceship = \...;
>
> // other stuff here
>
> // right here, has ship.engine changed?
>
> }

We can know if ship.engine has changed by checking the FFOP. If
ship.engine.warpCoil is different, then we\'ve changed engine.

## Temporarily Change Generation

If nobody\'s got a tether, we could change the generation temporarily,
to prevent anyone from reading anything. In a way, it would be
effectively uni.

Though, they could still reach it via an array, so maybe an extra bit or
check somewhere could help.

interesting, could we temporarily flip it back to readable by changing
the generation again?

fun fact, we could do something where:

-   start with an owning heap reference or stack reference

-   check that theres no current scope tethers to it

-   if there are, panic.

-   if we get here, there arent.

-   change its generation

**we now have a uni!**

This could also be used to give pure functions access to something
inside an IVSI, i think? if we temporarily change the generation of the
IVSI\...

though, it would mean that if we accessed it through other means, by a
roundabout alias, it would be in a weird state. hmm. well, not really,
if it was a uni. we\'d just remember this new generation.

this is kind of a one-time trick though. we cant do it on an already
immutable region.

## Make Little Temporary Copies

Just like how we sometimes make a temporary copy of an IVSI for a pure
call, maybe making little temporary copies is a generalizable technique.
Maybe we can use it in other places.

## Inlines Must Be Unique

Then it solves a ton of problems!

In practice, we would just copy things out before reading them. Bonus:
once theyre copied out, they get their own generations and are
aliasable!

## Readonly/Readwrite Permissions

Just like in the RWLock approach above, by having the permission
distinction, we could make sure there was only one readwrite reference,
which helps us out.

## Freeze Refs

Perhaps if we have a reference to an object, it should be frozen.

Can do this via either:

-   Scope tether. But, would run into a problem if there\'s another
    > tether to it in the same function.

-   Ref counting. If its just 1, we have the only ref to it, nobody else
    > does.

But, itll mean we can\'t modify an object that we have a ref to.

This could also be a special kind of reference.

## Remembering Scope in Object

rndmprsn had an idea where an object will have an integer to remember
the stack frame it was allocated in. This is its **lifetime.** We could
extend an object\'s life by lowering its lifetime.

The only tricky part is that we\'d have to lower every descendant\'s
lifetime too.

Perhaps there\'s a way to hybridize it?

## Inner Generations

Java has these, an integer version to detect
ConcurrentModificationException.

We can use these to detect when an inline object was replaced.

This is kind of what\'s going on with our array elements, too.

We can also put any inner generations at the end of the object. That way
the objects\' important data stays nice and compact, and if we dont have
to access the inner generation, then we just saved a cache miss.

## Inner Generations For Inline Interfaces (IGFIL)

This isn\'t an approach, it\'s a starting point for below approaches.

An inline interface will have a tag describing which variant it is.

We\'ll **xor the containing object\'s generation into that tag.** When
we read it out of the struct, we\'ll un-xor it. In other words, we\'re
combining the tag and generation.

We\'ll also want a couple bytes in there for metadata and tether.

**Must Tether Inline Varyings** (MTIV):

Even if we have the container tethered, we must tether the inner
generation if we want to read or write it (unless we\'re immediately
diving in, reading a value, and getting out, without holding onto a
reference or calling anything in-between).

In this way, we can be confident that if anyone is assuming the inner
object will stay type-stable, they will have made it known by scope
tethering it.

**Check Inner Tethers Before Destroy** (CITBD)

When we destroy something, we need to recursively check all the inner
generations to make sure they aren\'t tethered.

This might require recursive functions, but maybe not. We might be able
to use some fancy table magic to look up the addresses of all the
tethers inside the object.

## Inner Generations For Complex Varying Inlines (IGFCVI)

In this approach:

-   If there\'s an inline struct with any final owning heap references,
    > then it gets a generation at the top of the inline struct, the
    > **inner generation.**

-   As MTIV says, when we hold a reference to anything in there, we
    > tether that inner generation.

-   As CITBD says, we need to check all the inner tethers before
    > destroying them.

-   If the user wishes to opt out of this for the struct, they can make
    > it uni.

For example:

> struct Spaceship {
>
> crew: int;
>
> engine! Engine; // ← varying inline struct
>
> }
>
> struct Engine {
>
> fuel int;
>
> fuelCell FuelCell; // ← final inline owning reference
>
> }
>
> struct FuelCell {
>
> warpResonance int;
>
> myHeapThing \^Thing; // ← final heap owning reference
>
> }

Note that, even if we have a scope tether on the containing Spaceship
(or its owning array), we can\'t assume the myHeapThing will stay alive.
To have a reference to the Thing, we\'ll need to tether the engine (or
the Thing itself, explored in LTFIVOFFOP).

Depending on what we hold a reference to, the rules change a bit.

-   If we hold a reference to the engine, we need to scope tether the
    > engine.

    -   This is because we might pass this Engine reference to a
        > function which then assumes that the Engine is tethered, and
        > it then makes a borrow reference to the contained Thing.

-   If we hold a reference to the fuelCell, we need to scope tether the
    > engine.

-   If we hold a reference to the myHeapThing, we need to scope tether
    > the engine **or the** Thing. TBD which one is better.

## Lazy Tethering For Inline Varying Objects\' FFOPs (LTFIVOFFOP)

This approach says that, if we have inline type-stable objects (IOW
inline structs or elements), and we want to have a borrow reference to
them, we don\'t necessarily need to tether anything right away.

This approach is orthogonal to:

-   Inner Generations for Inline Interfaces (IGFIL) as its online
    > talking about type-stable objects.

-   Whether the containing generation is at the top of the allocation or
    > above the nearest varying struct. We\'ll lazily tether whatever is
    > nearest.

For example:

> struct Spaceship {
>
> crew: int;
>
> engine! Engine; // ← varying inline struct
>
> }
>
> struct Engine {
>
> fuel int;
>
> fuelCell FuelCell; // ← final inline owning reference
>
> }
>
> struct FuelCell {
>
> warpResonance int;
>
> myHeapThing \^Thing; // ← final heap owning reference
>
> }

If we have a scope tether on the containing Spaceship (or its owning
array), we can safely hold a borrow reference to anything inside:

-   We can hold a borrow reference to the engine. We know an Engine will
    > always be there, because of type stability. (But don\'t pass it to
    > an impure function, more on that below)

-   We can hold a borrow reference to the fuelCell. We know a FuelCell
    > will always be there, because of type stability. (But don\'t pass
    > it to an impure function, more on that below)

-   When we want to hold a borrow reference to the Thing, we simply
    > **tether the Thing.**

In other words, when\...

1.  We have a tether on the container (Spaceship here)

2.  It indirectly contains a heap-owned object (Thing here)

3.  We want to get a borrow reference to it

4.  We see that there\'s a varying (but type-stable) inline objects
    > between us and our tether (in other words, we \"passed through\" a
    > varying)

\...then we\'d **tether the heap-owned object** (Thing here) right then.

Note that, even if we have a scope tether on the containing Spaceship
(or its owning array), we can\'t assume the myHeapThing will stay alive.
To have a reference to it, we\'ll need to tether something, either
engine or the Thing itself.

However, this is difficult to ensure across function call boundaries. A
callee can\'t know if this borrow has passed through a varying. So we
need to do something special when we\'re passing an inner struct borrow
reference to an impure function.

If we want to pass to an impure function\...

-   a borrow reference to the engine, we need to scope tether the
    > containing Spaceship.

    -   OR we can **tether the Thing.** But there might be multiple of
        > these owned things, so maybe not.

-   a borrow reference to the fuelCell, we need to scope tether the
    > containing Spaceship.

    -   OR we can **tether the Thing.** But there might be multiple of
        > these owned things, so maybe not.

-   a borrow reference to the Thing, we still just **tether the Thing.**

## Undead Cycle / Constraint Ref Hybrid (UCCRH)

Keeping something alive is still actually a valid strategy sometimes.

We can\'t do it for arrays, or inline objects, but we can still do it
for heap objects.

We could have a release mode that\'s a little more resilient for this
case.

## Generationed FFOPs (GFFOP)

Just like how IGFIL xor\'d the container\'s generation into the inline
interface\'s tag, we can **xor the container\'s generation into the
FFOP.**

For example:

> struct Spaceship {
>
> crew int;
>
> engine! Engine; // ← varying inline struct
>
> }
>
> struct Engine {
>
> fuel int;
>
> fuelCell FuelCell; // ← final inline owning reference
>
> }
>
> struct FuelCell {
>
> warpResonance int;
>
> myHeapThing \^Thing; // ← final heap owning reference
>
> }

If we wanted to take a non-owning reference to fuelCell, the generation
part of the gen ref could actually be pointed at myHeapThing, which
would be xor\'d with the Spaceship\'s generation.

Tethering might be tricky though. We might need to make tethering be the
top byte instead of the bottom byte, because pointers don\'t use the top
byte.

This might be weird if Thing is an interface pointing to an actual Bork,
we deallocate it, and replace it with a pointer to a Zork which malloc
has decided to put in the same memory location. So maybe this is really
only a good idea if we\'re pointing at a struct, not an interface.

-   And if we can\'t xor the generation into the itable part of the fat
    > pointer because when we replace something, we might replace it
    > with the same type, but different location.

    -   Could we xor the itable ptr into the object pointer? Then, the
        > object pointer is xor\'d twice; once with the container\'s
        > generation, once with the itable.

This will definitely defeat some LLVM optimizations. Perhaps this is
best a super-long term ace in the hole.

# Promising Solutions

## Tether Scanning (V16)

In this approach:

-   Every scope tether remembers:

    -   Ptr to object

    -   Generation of object

    -   Offset to generation

    -   FFOP

    -   Offset to FFOP

-   Every undead node remembers:

    -   Generation

    -   Object pointer (live)

    -   Object pointer (undead)

    -   FFOP

    -   Next undead node pointer

-   When we modify an inline struct, we copy that phantom root and its
    > undead hierarchy, if these conditions are met:

    -   It contain a final owning reference.

    -   The containing struct is currently tethered.

-   Periodically, we:

    -   Scan through the stack, and look at each scope tether. For each
        > scope tether, we find the FFOP, and set a \"live\" bit in it.

        -   To scan the stack, could use stack maps, or a linked list
            > between tethers.

    -   Iterate the entire undead cycle, and:

        -   If an undead node\'s FFOP doesn\'t have the live bit set,
            > free it.

        -   If it does, then clear it.

-   What \"periodically\" means is TBD.

The intent is to find a way to gradually iterate the undead cycle, not
all at once. Perhaps if we just stall the next scan until we\'re sure
we\'ve scanned through the entire cycle, that would work.

## RWLock (V17)

We could have two bits for an object:

-   Is anyone using this for reading?

-   Is anyone using it for writing?

Only at most one can be set at a time.

If we did this for scope tethers, we might even be able to make reading
refs on top of writing refs.

Before setting something, we could make sure nobody\'s reading the thing
right now.

This is kind of like the other approach, but might require
readonly+readwrite reference distinction.

To alias a readwrite ref into multiple readonly ones, would we need to
re-tether?

In practice, this would likely be a lot like Rust\'s borrow checker, but
on top of GM and scope tethering.

## Constraint-Based (V18)

Basic idea:

-   Using Know If We\'re The Only Tether (KIWOT), a tether is 1 byte and
    > stores local\'s height.

-   Assert that we\'re the only tether before doing a territory change.

-   When we push or pop from an array, check for a tether on the array
    > itself and the object.

Past that, there\'s quite a bit of flexibility here.

-   We could make tethering:

    -   manual

    -   automatic for any local normal ref. (**preferred, but** we\'ll
        > see if its too unwieldy)

-   Regarding inline interfaces\...

    -   Require inline interfaces be unique.

    -   Inner Generations For Inline Interfaces (IGFIL) **(preferred)**

-   Whose generation do we use for inline varying structs?

    -   Reuse the containing struct\'s generation.

    -   Inner Generations For Complex Varying Inlines (IGFCVI)

    -   Generationed FFOPs (GFFOP) for structs, and *maybe* IGFCVI for
        > interfaces. (**preferred,** but a tad insane and likely wont
        > work. LETS GOOOO)

-   When to tether things inside inline varying structs:

    -   Do it up-front; when we tether something inside one, tether
        > either the container or the inline varying\'s own generation.

    -   Lazy Tethering For Inline Varying Objects\' FFOPs (LTFIVOFFOP),
        > do it as late as possible. **(preferred)**

-   If we try to destroy a heap-owned allocation that\'s tethered\...

    -   Halt the program. **(preferred default)**

    -   Undead Cycle / Constraint Ref Hybrid (UCCRH), have an undead
        > cycle to put it on.

# Notes

if we have a final hold ref to an array, and we want a hold ref to an
element from it, it causes a tether. (otherwise some alias pointing to
it might try to modify it) or maybe the &Spaceship means we can access
its fields just fine, but once we take a & to a heap ref or varying
inside it, we gotta lock it?

if we have a final hold ref to a struct, and we want a hold ref to a
contained final inl struct, its free.

something we have a hold ref to cannot have its territory changed tho.

\"territory\" means the indirectly owned memory locations.

so, we\'re locking down its territory basically.

if we have a hold ref to an array, we cant add or remove.

if we have a hold ref to a struct, we cant change:

\- varying heap type OR address.

\- varying inline\'s type.

well, if we cant add or remove, then we can trust that nothing\'s going
to swap out the element, and we can trust its refs are actually
final\...

so its like a constraint ref, kind of. hmm.

you know whats really nice about this? can be completely disabled at
runtime.

when we modify it, we can actually check if we\'re the only one with a
constraint ref to it, by checking the \*old\* value, that we have saved
on the stack. thats interesting! though, catalyst would have to be
careful about any Opt\<&Ship\>s around, and not assume it contains a
borrow ref perhaps.

if we holding the array, we can be sure we\'re not replacing an
instance. same with holding the element.

so either way, we can trust the finals in there.

if we holding an instance, we can be sure we\'re not changing an IVSI?

or maybe we can rely on unis.

we can require copying for every IVSI. BUT if we\'re using region borrow
checker, we dont actually have to copy. we can have the gen ref point to
the union tag, which is the type id + object generation. when we free
it, we\'ll scramble it too btw.

so, we can actually elide the copy when reading with pure functions.

but, in all other cases, we should do the copy. type-stable regions will
especially want to do some copying here.

well thats nice =D

if we\'re in a monomorph thats a regular HGM region, then we can skip
the copy. the generation works.

if we\'re in a monomorph that\'s a type stable region, we need to do the
copy. we dont want anything to point in here.

and the ref can escape, thats fine. nice!

this all works because nobody can actually extend the lifetime of any
object, we only detect when someone changes something. we\'re actually
locking things. dont quite grok it yet, does that work?

last resort, we can have a best-effort prod mode, have something like
the undead cycle for whole allocations, and maybe even a mode where
\*everything\* is yought onto the heap.

i think we might still need IVSIs to be uni. we need to make it so an
entire container is frozen when someone tries to freeze something
that\'s inl. otherwise, if we try to pop the container from an array, we
won\'t real\--well, no, we\'d have a destructor or something run on pop
to halt things.

it seems risky to lock an entire allocation, if a library locked an
instance it could crash when we try to modify the container.

perhaps we \*should\* make it so we have other gens and locks inside the
struct. or at least when its defined by a different project. or maybe
have a keyword to opt-out of a generation for it.

if we have a hold, we can replace entire inline structs.

ok, we can deeply assert whenever we destroy something.

and we can have a generation on every IVSI and yon thing.

when we scope tether a struct thats inline in a struct and move
something into its place, we need to keep the entire old hierarchy alive
until the tether expires.

same thing that happened with arrays.

that\... might not be okay.

we might need some other mechanism here. uni for all inlines, or
asserting tethers, or something.

note it only happens for varying things.

im sure we can solve it\...

and if not, the rbc and type stability will help us get the speeds we
want.

freeze refs is the answer. when we tether, were promising we wont change
any owning ref in the hierarchy.

or, every borrow ref can individually scope tether the direct thing it
points at. stack-based rc.

ECS would still be fast. and could have IVSIs.

would we need to tether every element in an array? no.

ok, ECS still fast\...

maybe this is a good foundation we can build from. we can rebuild.

what if we have a separate generation on the stack for borrows, and
argument borrows are a bit wider

what if we have the undead cycle check the generation, to know when to
kill a hierarchy? we\'d need is a generation above every inline varying
thing with a hierarchy. undead cycle would detect that grn is different,
and free the stuff from the old hierarchy eventually.

or what if we signal some other way\... like modifying something in the
pointees
